.TH TMT 1 2011-09-15
.SH NAME
tmt \- Turing Machine Tool, a tool for creating and debugging single tape deterministic turing machines.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tmt
[
.B -
|
.I file
|
.I -command
] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtmt\fP simulates a single tape deterministic turing machine.
It reads and executes commands from the standard input, files, and/or command line arguments.
You can specify files with commands to run through as command line parameters.
The special file name '-' (a single dash) represents the standard input.
Other command line parameters starting with a dash are interpreted as commands themselves.
.SS COMMANDS
Unless otherwise noted, the default value for the optional parameters is '-' (a single dash).
.TP
\fBversion\fP
Show the name and version of tmt.
.TP
\fBreset\fP
Reset everything.
.TP
\fBstate\fP
Get the state the machine is in.
.TP
\fBstate\fP \fInew-state\fP
Set the state the machine is in to \fInew-state\fP.
.TP
\fBw\fP[\fBrite\fP] [ \fIsymbol\fP ]
Write \fIsymbol\fP at the tape head.
.TP
\fBr\fP[\fBead\fP]
Read the current symbol at the tape head.
.TP
\fBp\fP[\fBut\fP[\fBr\fP]] [ \fIsymbol\fP ]
Write \fIsymbol\fP at the tape head, and move right.
.TP
\fBputl\fP [ \fIsymbol\fP ]
Write \fIsymbol\fP at the tape head, and move left.
.TP
\fBi\fP[\fBnsert\fP[\fBl\fP]] [ \fIsymbol\fP ]
Insert \fIsymbol\fP on the left of the tape head.
.TP
\fBinsertr\fP [ \fIsymbol\fP ]
Insert \fIsymbol\fP on the right of the tape head.
.TP
\fBbegin\fP
Move the tape head to the beginning of the tape.
.TP
\fBend\fP
Move the tape head to the end of the tape.
.TP
\fBright\fP [ \fIdistance\fP ]
Move the tape head \fIdistance\fP to the right. The default value is 1.
.TP
\fBleft\fP [ \fIdistance\fP ]
Move the tape head \fIdistance\fP to the left. The default value is 1.
.TP
\fBmove\fP \fIdistance\fP
Move \fIdistance\fP to the right. (Negative distance allowed.) Actually, this is just an alias for \fBright\fP.
.TP
\fBclear\fP
Clear the tape.
.TP
\fBclearr\fP
Clear the tape on the right side of the tape head.
.TP
\fBclearl\fP
Clear the tape on the left side of the tape head.
.TP
\fBrule\fP \fIstate\fP \fItape-symbol\fP \fInew-state\fP [ \fInew-tape-symbol\fP [ \fItape-movement\fP ] ]
Add or change the rule for when \fItape-symbol\fP is read while in the specified \fIstate\fP.
The empty tape symbol is '-' (a single dash).
\fItape movement\fP can be '<-', '-' or '->'. ('L', 'R', 'l', 'r', '--', '0', '>', '<', '<=', and '=>' are valid aliases.)
.TP
\fBrule\fP \fIstate\fP \fItape-symbol\fP
Remove the specified rule.
.TP
\fBdefaultrule\fP \fIstate\fP \fInew-state\fP [ \fInew-tape-symbol\fP [ \fItape-movement\fP ] ]
Add/change the default rule for \fIstate\fP.
This is what is executed when the machine is in \fIstate\fP, but no rule applies to the current situation.
Using the special value '-' (a single dash) for \fIstate\fP adds/changes the default rule that applies to all states.
.TP
\fBdefaultrule\fP \fInew-state\fP
A shortcut for \fBdefaultrule - \fP\fInew-state\fP.
.TP
\fBclearrules\fP
Remove all rules.
.TP
\fBcleardefaultrules\fP
Remove all the default rules.
.TP
\fBclearallrules\fP
Remove both the specific and the default rules.
.TP
\fBhalt\fP \fIstate\fP
Let \fIstate\fP be an halt state.
Execution will stop whenever the machine enters this state.
.TP
\fBnohalt\fP \fIstate\fP
Let \fIstate\fP no longer be an halt state.
.TP
\fBtape\fP
Show the entire tape. Square brackets indicate the position of the tape head.
.TP
\fBtape\fP \fIsymbol\fP [ \fIsymbol\fP ... ]
Replace the tape with the given list of symbols. The tape head will be at the first one.
.TP
\fBtapestring\fP \fIstring\fP
Same as \fBtape\fP, except that every character is seen as a seperate symbol.
.TP
\fBreadtape\fP [ \fIfile\fP ]
Like \fBtape\fP, but read the (whitespace seperated) symbols from the specified file.
If nothing or '-' (a single dash) is given, the standard input is used.
The file is read all the way to the end.
For the standard input that means that it will only stop when the user ends the standard input stream by pressing ctrl-D, after which the standard input is not usable anymore.
.TP
\fBreadstring\fP [ \fIfile\fP ]
Like \fBreadtape\fP, except that every character is seen as a seperate symbol.
.TP
\fBreadline\fP [ \fIfile\fP ]
Like \fBreadstring\fP, except that it only reads one line.
This makes it possible to use this command multiple times for the standard input.
.TP
\fBs\fP[\fBtep\fP] [ \fIn\fP ]
Execute the next \fIn\fP steps. The default is one step.
.TP
\fBsteptrace\fP|\fBst\fP [ \fIn\fP ]
Like \fBstep\fP, but show what's happening.
.TP
\fBrun\fP
Run the program until the machine enters an halt state.
The execution can be interrupted by SIGINT (Ctrl-C).
.TP
[\fBrun\fP]\fBtrace\fP
Like \fBrun\fP, but show what's happening.
.TP
\fBdump\fP
Show all the rules and the current state of the machine.
The output of this command can be used as input to restore the current machine.
.TP
\fBinput\fP [ \fIfile\fP ]
Run the commands in \fIfile\fP. 
The special name '-' (a single dash, the default value), refers to the standard input.
.TP
\fBreturn\fP
Return from \fBinput\fP.
.TP
\fBexit\fP
Exit the simulator.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Example turing machine definition
.nf
state s
rule     s 0      d - R
rule     d 0      d 0 R
rule     d 1      r x L
rule     d 2      r y L
rule     d x      d x R
rule     d y      d y R
rule     r x      r x L
rule     r y      r y L
rule     r 0      r 0 L
rule     r -      s - R
rule     s x    cx2 - R
rule   cx2 x    cx1 - R
rule   cx1 x    cy3 - R
rule   cy3 x    cy3 - R
rule   cy3 y    cy2 - R
rule   cy2 y    cy1 - R
rule   cy1 y    cy0 - R
rule   cy0 y    cy0 - R
rule   cy0 - accept - R
defaultrule reject
halt reject
halt accept
.fi
.SS Example invocation of \fBtmt\fP
\fBtmt tm -readline -run -state\fP
.PP
Read the turing machine definition from 'tm', read the tape from the standard input, run the machine, and show the name of the halt state.
.SH AUTHORS
\fBtmt\fP is written by \fBMara Bos\fP <\fIm-ou.se@m-ou.se\fP> and \fBMaarten de Vries\fP <\fImaarten@de-vri.es\fP>.
.SH BUGS
Please report any bugs to Mara: \fBm-ou.se@m-ou.se\fP.
.SH SOURCE
\fBtmt\fP can be found on \fBgithub\fP: \fIhttp://github.com/m-ou-se/tmt\fP.
